In this video, I'd like to go over
1 of the most basic of the stl
containers, the array container.
I'll call it std array in
this video, so we don't
confuse it with a raw array.
In order to use the std array
container, we must include
the array header file.
The std array container allows us to
create fixed size arrays of any type.
So what makes this different
from a raw array, a lot.
First, it's an object type.
Std array always has its
size associated with it.
Unlike a raw array, a std array
doesn't decay to a pointer to
the first element of the array
when we pass it into a function.
It's also very efficient.
Element access happens
in constant time.
Constant time means that the time
it takes to access an element
is independent of the number
of elements in the container.
So if std array has 5 elements and
you wanted to access 1 of them.
The time required would be the
same as if it had 100,000 elements.
Also since a std array is
implemented behind the scenes by
the stl as a wrapper class around
a raw array, we can get access
to that raw array address if we
need to and we can use it with
libraries that use raw pointers.
But the biggest benefit is that
it's part of the stl, so we can use
it with iterators and algorithms.
The std array class wasn't
part of the original stl.
It was added in c++11.
You should always first consider
using std array in modern c++ when you
have a need for a fixed size array.
Don't use raw arrays unless you
have a compelling reason to do so.
All of the stl iterators are
available with std array,
and they don't invalidate.
And that makes sense because std
array is a fixed size structure.
Okay, so first, let's look at
a few ways to initialize std
arrays and then we'll see some
of the common member methods.
Std array is a very
simple template class.
Since the size of the array must
be known at compile time, we have
to provide both the type we want
to store in it as well as the size.
This is exactly what we did
a few videos ago when we
created a my array class.
In the first example in the slide,
I declared arr1 as a std array
of 5 integers, and I initialize
these 5 integers to 1 2 3 4 and 5.
If we have more than 5 integers in the
initializer list, we'll get an error.
If we have fewer than 5, the remaining
integers omitted will be set to 0.
Now there is a quark with
the initializer list.
In c++11, you need to
provide double curly braces.
In c++14 and forward you don't,
just a single curly brace.
So in the second example,
I'm declaring stooges as
a std array of 3 strings.
And I'm initializing them
to Larry Moe and Curly.
Note that I can use c-style
string literals and they'll
be converted to std strings.
There's also a very handy
way to assign multiple values
to an existing std array.
We can use an assignment
statement and an initializer list.
This is really cool
and extremely useful.
So now let's see some common
methods provided by std array.
In this section, I'm not going to
exhaustively go over all the methods
provided by all of the stl containers.
That would be pretty boring
for me and, it would probably
be even more boring for you.
So what I want to do is I'll
go over some of the most common
methods used and some of the methods
particular to specific containers.
So let's start with the size method.
This method is available
to all containers.
In the std array, it's pretty simple.
It's the size of the
container and it's fixed.
Arrays also let us access
individual array elements.
We can use either the subscript
syntax or the .at method.
Now if you remember from the
vector, subscript operator
does no bounds checking.
But the at method does do bounce
checking, and an exception is
thrown if we're out of bounds.
You can see in the example code that
arr at 0 will refer to 1 in the array
arr, and arr sub-1 refers to the 2.
The std array also provides
front and back methods.
Now these methods return references
to the element at the front of the
array and of the element at the
back of the array, respectively.
In this example arr.front refers to
the 1 and arr.back refers to the 5.
The empty method will return
true if the std array is
empty and false otherwise.
This doesn't mean how many
elements out of the total elements
you're using, it basically means
it's the size of the array.
This is rarely ever used
with std array but it is
with other stl containers.
The fill method is very handy,
it fills the std array with
whatever element is provided.
Remember, I'm using ints here
for these examples, but these
could be almost any data type.
We can also swap 2 std arrays
of the same size and type.
All we have to do is simply call
swap with 1 and pass the other in.
And finally, we can use the
dot data method to get access
to the underlying raw array.
In this case, data returns the address
of the raw array of integers, which
we store in a pointer variable.
As you can see, std arrays
are very straightforward.
Now let's head over to the
IDE and we'll see some more
examples of using std array.
Before we head off to the IDE
and run some examples with the
std array, I'd like to refer you
to this website and I've mentioned
this website a couple times in
the course, it's cppreference.com.
I'm here in the United States, so
I'm getting the english version.
I'm not sure if this is
localized for other countries.
It seems like it would be because
you see the EN at the beginning here.
In any case, go to cppreference.com
and it's got all kinds of
good information about c++.
Up to now, we really haven't
needed it too much, but with the
containers library and the stl,
your algorithms and your iterators,
this is a really useful reference.
I'm right at the main page here.
And you can see the containers
library is right here.
So I'll just select that, and it shows
you all the containers in the stls.
For example, array that's one
we're going to talk about now.
A vector, a deck, a forward list.
We'll talk about all of
these in this section.
But let's just look at the array.
And this gives you a lot of
really good reference and
documentation on the array.
You can see it's implemented
as a template class here.
And if you scroll down just a little
bit all of these containers will
talk about iterator and validation.
So if you're not sure about -- if
you've got an iterator and you've
removed an item is it invalid now.
it'll say it all throughout
the documentation here.
Also the other important
piece are these, right here,
these member functions.
This tells you what member
functions are available for
this particular container.
Now you can see here I can construct
it and destruct it and so forth.
But these are the real
important ones here.
This is a really simple
container, the array container.
So you've got the at method, you've
got the overloader subscript operator.
Notice this one does balance checking,
and the operator subscript does
not, the front, the back, the data.
The same things I talked
about in the slides.
We've also got iterators.
You can see all the iterators
are available to us here.
And then we've got some capacity
methods and the fill and the
swap that I also mentioned.
So this gives you a lot of
really good information.
Now if you're not sure about what
the front method does, I mean it
says here access the first element,
which is makes sense right the front.
But if you want more information,
you can click on here.
And not all of these things are going
to be easy reads when you're first
starting out with c++, but you'll
understand this soon enough and little
by little, you'll understand more
and more and more, and then these
references become very, very handy.
In this case, you can
see what does it do.
Well, it provides a reference
to the first element.
That's kind of what I
said earlier, right.
The complexity is constant
time, which is cool.
Usually most of these methods
will have a complexity
associated with them.
And it'll be listed here.
I mentioned before that with
the stl you know what you get.
So when you're using these
methods, you know their complexity.
So if you're using something that's a
linear time, you'll understand that.
If it's constant time,
it'll say it as well.
And then it's got usually some
kind of sample code here that you
can run right inside your browser.
So it's a very handy site.
I think you're going
to refer to this a lot.
When I go to the ide, I'll be
playing with a lot of source code
that you can play around with and
it covers the majority of these,
but obviously, it's impossible to
cover them all, especially as the
containers and the algorithms and
the iterators all come together, the
permutations just go skyrocketing.
So play on your own.
And go through here, study this.
This is the best way to really
learn the stl, but watch the videos
first and then you'll be able
to understand this a lot better.
All right, so let's
head over to the IDE.
Okay, so I'm back in the IDE.
I'm in the section 20
workspace in the array project.
And what I've done is I've broken
this project up into 9 test functions.
And each one of these functions
is independent and deals with
specific methods or iterators or
algorithms that we can really learn.
My perspective on the stl is the
more examples you can see, the
better you're going to learn it.
And the more you can apply what you're learning to
other examples that you haven't seen yet.
Okay, so why don't we start.
Rather than jump back and forth
and running and compiling and
so forth, I've already run this.
And the output is over
here on the right.
I've run all 9 functions over here
on the right, and there's the output.
And what I'll do is I'll
go through them, so you can
understand exactly what's going on.
This will save a little time,
and that way you can stop the
video and look at them as well.
So let's start with test 1.
First thing we're going to do here is
we're going to create 2 std arrays.
They're both the same size, and
they're both of the same type.
So I'm creating an array right here
called arr1 of 5 integers, and I'm
initializing it to 1 2 3 4 and 5.
I'm also creating array 2,
same size same type, but
I'm not initializing it.
And then I'm displaying both arrays.
Now the display function
is right up here.
Let me clear this
and show that to you.
And the way the display functions work
for std arrays, notice the parameter
right here, the parameter type.
You've got to supply the information.
So you've got to supply
the type and the size.
For all it's doing is just using a
range-based for loop to display it.
All right, so let's get back to this.
Let's go through test case 1 here.
So we've got those
2 arrays, arr1 arr2.
I'm displaying both of them.
They're out right here.
You can see there's my
test 1 output right here.
Notice the first 1 prints out 1
2 3 4 5, exactly like we expect.
Now notice arr2, we're
displaying it right here.
We've got 5 garbage values.
So nothing is initialized.
When we do something like this,
we're initializing the std
array, but we're not initializing
the elements of the std array.
That's important to understand.
Now we have here is a really
nice way to assign a bunch
of values to a std array.
And the syntax is dead
simple and it's so handy.
So what we're doing here is we're
assigning 10 20 30 40 and 50 to
arr2, that's the one that had
all those garbage values in it.
And then we're displaying
those 2 arrays again.
So you can see them displaying right
here, 1 2 3 4 5 and now 10 20 30 40 and 50,
which is really nice.
Here we're just displaying both sizes.
Now they're both the same size, right.
So we should -- we expect a 5 and a 5,
and that's exactly what we get here.
They're both size 5.
Size isn't really used
very often with std arrays.
The size is fixed, right.
So it is what it is.
It's right here.
But it's used a lot
in other containers.
Let me clear this a little bit, and
let me scroll up just a bit so we
can get to these guys right down
here, the last couple of lines.
You can see here in this example
that we can subscript into
arr1 or arr2 any std array.
This does not do bounce checking.
So what we're doing here is we're
storing a 1000 into arr1 sub-0.
Okay, that's this guy.
We're basically replacing
that 1 with a 1000.
And then over here what I'm doing
is I'm replacing arr at 1 with
2000 so that would be the 2.
So I'm replacing the 2 with 2000.
This does no bounce checking,
this does do bounce checking.
So if I'm out of bounds right
here, I'm going to get an exception
thrown an out of range exception.
And all I'm doing now is
displaying arr1, and you can
see arr1 displaying right here.
Notice the 1000 and the
2000 have been updated.
I still have the 3 4 and the 5.
And then the last 2 examples are right
here at the bottom where I'm saying
what is arr.front and what is arr
-- sorry, arr2.front and arr2.back.
So what's the front element
of array 2, and what's the
back element of array 2.
Well, array 2 is right here.
The front element is a 10,
the back element is a 50.
That's exactly what we expect.
That's exactly what prints right here.
Okay, so some really simple examples.
And again, I'm going to do a
lot of examples in this section
so you can better understand
how some of this stuff works.
Let's take a look at the next one now.
And you can see the output
for test 2 right over here
on the right, right here.
All right, so what are
we doing here, same idea.
I've got 2 arrays, array1 and array2.
I'm initializing the first one 1 to
5 and 10 20 30 40 and 50 for array2.
I'm displaying both of them.
And there they are right there,
just what you would expect 1 2 3 4
5 and 10, all the way through 50.
Now I'm using the fill method.
I'm filling array1 with 0s.
And this could be any integer.
I'm just passing a 0 into it.
And again, remember, I'm using
integers for these examples.
These could be almost any type.
So I'm using a 0 here.
I'm filling array1 with a 0, and
then I'm displaying those guys again.
Notice how array1 right
here is all 0s now.
So it's a real handy way to fill an
array with whatever value we want.
Now we're coming here, and what we're
saying is let's swap those 2 arrays.
I could say array1.swap array2
or array2.swap array1, right.
I mean swapping is swapping.
So in this case, I'm swapping those 2
arrays, and I'm displaying them again.
And you can see that they have
indeed been swapped, right.
First it was a 0,
then it was 10 to 50.
Now it's 10 to 50 and
the 0s are second.
Okay, so let's move
on to the third test.
And let's take a look at this one.
The results are right here.
I had another line that printed that
header right here, but I removed it.
That's why you're seeing
that test 3 twice.
All right, so I've
got array1 1 2 3 4 5.
Again, it's a std array of 5 integers.
Now what's going on here.
The data method returns the
raw pointer that points to the
behind the scenes raw array.
What happens is, remember,
arr1 is an object.
So it has some data
associated with it.
One of the pieces of data is 5, right.
It knows its size.
The other piece of data that
it has is the actual array.
In this case, 5.
So this guy is what's returned
the address of that element.
So when we say arr1.data, what
we're returning is the address
of that first element in the
raw array behind the scenes.
Remember, the std array is really
a wrapper around a raw array.
And I'm storing that into pointer
which is a pointer to an integer,
the address of an integer.
Now if I display pointer, you
can see right there, that's the
memory address being displayed.
That's the memory address of
that first element in the array.
Now I can change that
through the pointer.
I could say dereference
pointer equals 10000.
And I just put a 10000 in here.
And if I display arr1, you can
see it right here, see that
10000 being updated right there.
Now you don't do this very often.
Obviously, the whole point of using a
std array is not to use a raw array.
But sometimes we use
libraries that use raw arrays.
So we can still use std
arrays for our work.
And then when we need to pass in
the raw array, we can use the data
method and send them what they want.
But we can still have the safety
and ease of use on our end.
And what's really cool about using
the std arrays on our end is because
they are stl containers, so we can
use them with iterators, we can use
them with algorithms and so forth.
So that's that's the real power.
We'll go to test 4.
And test 4 is a real simple example.
We're going to sort this array.
It's really, really cool.
Here's the array 2 1 4 5 3.
Again, all of these are std arrays.
And I've defined this
1 to 5 integers again.
I'm displaying it right here.
And this is test 4 so you can
see the output right here.
So I'm displaying array 1 2 1 4 5 3.
That's what we get
right here, 2 1 4 5 3.
Then I'm sorting it.
Now this sort is an algorithm, right.
That's my sort function and
it expects 2 iterators, where
do I start, where do I end.
Well, I'm starting at the beginning,
and I'm ending at the end.
I'm sorting the entire array.
And then I'm displaying it.
So you can see right here it's
displaying the sorted array,
1 2 3 4 5, easy as that.
All right, so let's
take a look at test 5.
And for each one of these
tests, I tried to add a little
bit different functionalities.
Again, the more examples,
you see the better.
Hopefully, you'll start seeing the
patterns of use, and it makes it
much much easier to understand.
All right, so here's test 5.
You can see the output right
here is just 1 line of output.
Here's my array arr1 2 1 4 5 3.
And what we want to do is we want to
find the minimum the maximum in there.
So we have an algorithm called
min element, and we have
another one called max element.
It expects iterators,
right, it's an algorithm.
So array1 begin array1.end.
I want to search through the entire
array for the minimum element.
And this doesn't return
the minimum element.
This returns an iterator
to the minimum element.
So this is how you would
declare that variable.
Min num is an iterator to
a std array of 5 integers.
Now that's ugly, right.
That's really ugly looking code.
It's readable, but it's kind of ugly.
This is much nicer.
Let the compiler figure it out.
So I did it the long way
for the minimum number.
And I did it the short way
using auto for the max number.
So all I'm saying is auto max num hey
compiler figure out that max number
is type based on the return here.
And I'm doing the same thing.
And remember, we get back iterators
so we dereference the iterators
and we get back the min number,
which in this case is 1 and the
max number which in this case is 5.
And that's exactly
what we expected here.
So let's move on to test 6.
And test 6 is a real simple test.
You can see it again right over here,
there's only one line of output.
There is another algorithm
called adjacent find.
And what it does it searches through
a container and returns the first
occurrence of 2 adjacent values.
Now these 2 adjacent values are
compared, right, with the equality
operator, which we would overload
if we had our own classes, but
here we're using integers again.
So you can see here it is.
Right here, I've got 2 3s,
one right next to another.
That's what I expect.
So this also returns an iterator.
I'm using auto and I'm saying
adjacent equals std adjacent
find from beginning to the end.
Give me the first occurrence
of any 2 adjacent items.
It's possible there
are no adjacent items.
So I would check if adjacent is not
equal to array end, I found something.
If it is equal to array end,
there were no adjacent elements.
So in this case, we found them.
And there's the iterator,
which we dereference.
And you can see right here adjacent
element found with value 3.
Pretty cool and pretty easy
and pretty powerful as well.
Hopefully, you're starting to
see the real power of the stl.
It's actually awesome.
You can do so much with it.
All right, test 7.
Here's the output for
test 7 right here.
Real easy.
We're using the accumulate algorithm.
We've used this before as an example.
In order to use this, you
have to include numeric.
Okay, it's not an algorithm.
It's an included numeric.
So make sure you do that.
And all it does is it accumulates
from this iterator to that iterator,
and this is where it starts.
If you started at 10, it
would start adding from 10.
In this case, I'm starting from 0.
What's really important here is that
this type and this type and this type
are the same, so double double 0.0.
Make sure they're all the same.
Otherwise, you can run into some
really, really weird little errors.
We do this.
It sums them up 1 plus 2 plus
3 plus 4 plus 5, we display it
and we get the sum is 15, which
is just what we would expect.
And let's do a couple of more
we're almost done with these.
Hopefully, you're following along.
I think you are because it's
pretty straightforward stuff.
The last 2 we'll do is the
count and then we'll do a count
if using a lambda in test 9.
So here's test 8.
This time I've got a std
array of 10 integers.
And again i called it array1.
And in this case, I've
got 1 2 3 4 5 6 3s.
I just want to count them.
So I'm going to use
the algorithm count.
So I'm going to say std count,
they always use iterators
from beginning to end.
What am I looking for, the 3.
That's it.
What do I expect back,
I expect back 6, right.
I just counted them up here.
So this is an integer.
You get back the integer of
the number of occurrences.
It says I found 3 6 times.
This would same thing we would expect.
And then the last one is the count if,
which is very similar to count except.
It's using a predicate, and what
we're going to do is we're going
to supply a lambda expression.
So here's what I've got.
I've got arr1 again is 10 integers
it's just std array, and those are the
10 inches you can see them right here.
And what I want to do is I
want to find out how many
numbers are between 10 and 200.
So there's 1, there's
2, there's 3, there's 4.
I don't want to include
200 in this case.
So I expect back a 4.
So what do we use we use count if.
Where do we start, at the beginning.
Where do we end, at the end.
And what's the predicate.
Well, I want to return true
when x is greater than 10
and x is less than 200.
That's it.
And there's my lambda expression.
You can see my x is being passed
into here for each element.
So the 1 will be passed in here
as x, and we're going to check
that the 2, the 3 all the way
from whatever our iterators say.
So in this case how many
matches we expect, 4.
We'll display them right
here and that's what you get
right there in the output.
Okay, so again, a lot of examples.
I did a lot of examples on purpose
because I want you to have a lot
of examples on your end in the
source code that you can play with.
And as I said, you're probably
going to get tired of seeing
these examples, but the more
examples you see the better.
All right, so that covers std array.
In the next video, we'll start
talking about std vector, which
you know a lot about already.